\PassOptionsToPackage{unicode=true}{hyperref} % options for packages loaded elsewhere
\PassOptionsToPackage{hyphens}{url}
%
\documentclass[]{article}
\usepackage{lmodern}
\usepackage{amssymb,amsmath}
\usepackage{ifxetex,ifluatex}
\usepackage{fixltx2e} % provides \textsubscript
\ifnum 0\ifxetex 1\fi\ifluatex 1\fi=0 % if pdftex
  \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
  \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
  \usepackage{textcomp} % provides euro and other symbols
\else % if luatex or xelatex
  \usepackage{unicode-math}
  \defaultfontfeatures{Ligatures=TeX,Scale=MatchLowercase}
\fi
% use upquote if available, for straight quotes in verbatim environments
\IfFileExists{upquote.sty}{\usepackage{upquote}}{}
% use microtype if available
\IfFileExists{microtype.sty}{%
\usepackage[]{microtype}
\UseMicrotypeSet[protrusion]{basicmath} % disable protrusion for tt fonts
}{}
\IfFileExists{parskip.sty}{%
\usepackage{parskip}
}{% else
\setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
\setlength{\parskip}{6pt plus 2pt minus 1pt}
}
\usepackage{hyperref}
\hypersetup{
            pdftitle={The Woods Hole Assessment Model (WHAM): a general state-space assessment framework that incorporates time- and age-varying processes via random effects and links to environmental covariates},
            pdfauthor={Brian C. Stock1, Timothy J. Miller 1},
            pdfborder={0 0 0},
            breaklinks=true}
\urlstyle{same}  % don't use monospace font for urls
\usepackage[margin=1in]{geometry}
\usepackage{graphicx,grffile}
\makeatletter
\def\maxwidth{\ifdim\Gin@nat@width>\linewidth\linewidth\else\Gin@nat@width\fi}
\def\maxheight{\ifdim\Gin@nat@height>\textheight\textheight\else\Gin@nat@height\fi}
\makeatother
% Scale images if necessary, so that they will not overflow the page
% margins by default, and it is still possible to overwrite the defaults
% using explicit options in \includegraphics[width, height, ...]{}
\setkeys{Gin}{width=\maxwidth,height=\maxheight,keepaspectratio}
\setlength{\emergencystretch}{3em}  % prevent overfull lines
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}
\setcounter{secnumdepth}{5}
% Redefines (sub)paragraphs to behave more like sections
\ifx\paragraph\undefined\else
\let\oldparagraph\paragraph
\renewcommand{\paragraph}[1]{\oldparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi
\ifx\subparagraph\undefined\else
\let\oldsubparagraph\subparagraph
\renewcommand{\subparagraph}[1]{\oldsubparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi

% set default figure placement to htbp
\makeatletter
\def\fps@figure{htbp}
\makeatother

\usepackage{url}
\usepackage{setspace}
%\singlespacing
%\onehalfspacing
\doublespacing
\usepackage{lineno}
\linenumbers
\usepackage[belowskip=0pt,aboveskip=0pt]{caption}
\usepackage{booktabs}
\usepackage{longtable}
\usepackage{array}
\usepackage{multirow}
\usepackage{wrapfig}
\usepackage{float}
\usepackage{colortbl}
\usepackage{pdflscape}
\usepackage{tabu}
\usepackage{threeparttable}
\usepackage{threeparttablex}
\usepackage[normalem]{ulem}
\usepackage{makecell}
\usepackage{xcolor}

\title{The Woods Hole Assessment Model (WHAM): a general state-space assessment
framework that incorporates time- and age-varying processes via random
effects and links to environmental covariates}
\author{Brian C. Stock\textsuperscript{1}, Timothy J. Miller \textsuperscript{1}}
\date{}

\begin{document}
\maketitle

\(^1\)\href{mailto:brian.stock@noaa.gov}{\nolinkurl{brian.stock@noaa.gov}},
\href{mailto:timothy.j.miller@noaa.gov}{\nolinkurl{timothy.j.miller@noaa.gov}},
Northeast Fisheries Science Center, National Marine Fisheries Service,
166 Water Street, Woods Hole, MA 02543, USA\\

\pagebreak

\hypertarget{abstract}{%
\subsection*{Abstract}\label{abstract}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsection}{Abstract}

WHAM is great.

\hypertarget{keywords}{%
\subsubsection*{Keywords}\label{keywords}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsubsection}{Keywords}

state-space; stock assessment; random effects; time-varying;
environmental effects; recruitment; natural mortality; Template Model
Builder (TMB)

\pagebreak

\hypertarget{introduction}{%
\section{Introduction}\label{introduction}}

The last two decades have increasingly seen a push for more holistic,
ecosystem-based fisheries management (Larkin, 1996; Link, 2002). In
part, this is a recognition that considering single species in isolation
produces riskier and less robust outcomes long-term (Patrick and Link,
2015). In several high-profile cases, fisheries management has failed to
prevent collapses because they did not reduce fishing pressure in
responses to changes in natural mortality (\(M\)), recruitment, or
migration patterns caused by dynamics external to the stock in question
(Northern cod: Shelton et al., 2006; Rose and Rowe, 2015; Gulf of Maine
cod: Pershing et al., 2015; Pacific sardine: Zwolinski and Demer, 2012).
This is particularly concerning in the context of climate change and the
wide range of biological processes---often assumed to be constant---in
stock assessments that are likely to be affected (Stock et al., 2011).

One approach to account for changing productivity is to explicitly link
population processes to environmental covariates in single-species stock
assessments, i.e.~the mechanistic approach \emph{sensu} Punt et al.
(2014). Traditional single-species assessments are based on internal
population dynamics and the effect of fishing mortality (\(F\)), even
though fisheries scientists have long known that these are important
drivers of time-varying population processes, e.g.~recruitment,
mortality, growth, and movement (Garstang, 1900; Hjort, 1914). Effects
of the environment or interactions with other species can be considered
contextually, rather than explicitly as estimated parameters (although
temporal variation in empirical weight and maturity at age can affect
reference points). Despite how counterintuitive this may seem to
ecologists and oceanographers who study such relationships, the evidence
for direct linkages to specific environmental covariates is often weak
and can break down over time (McClatchie et al., 2010; Myers, 1998).
Additionally, the primary goal of most assessments is to provide
management advice on near-term sustainable harvest levels---not to
explain ecological relationships. Even if an environmental covariate
directly affects fish productivity, including the effect in an
assessment may not improve management advice if the effect is weak (De
Oliveira and Butterworth, 2005). Worse, including environmental effects
in an assessment or management system has been shown to actually provide
worse management in some cases (De Oliveira and Butterworth, 2005; Punt
et al., 2014; Walters and Collie, 1988). This can be true even in cases
of relatively well-understood mechanistic links between oceanic
conditions and fish populations, as in the case of sea surface
temperature and Pacific sardine (Hill et al., 2018; Zwolinski and Demer,
2012). Still, incorporating mechanistic environment-productivity links
in assessments does have the potential to reduce residual variance,
particularly in periods when few demographic data exist (Miller et al.,
2016; Shotwell et al., 2014).

An alternative approach is to allow biological parameters to vary
stochastically over time, i.e.~the empirical approach \emph{sensu} Punt
et al. (2014). In this case, the variation is caused by a range of
sources that are not explicitly modeled. Statistical catch-at-age (SCAA)
models typically only estimate year-specific recruitment (\(R_t\)) and
\(F_t\), often as deviations from a mean that may be a function of
spawning biomass, e.g. \(\text{log}R_t = \text{log}R_0 + \epsilon_t\).
The main reason that other parameters are assumed constant is simply
that there are not enough degrees of freedom to estimate many
time-varying parameters. One common solution is to penalize the
deviations, e.g. \(\epsilon_t \sim \mathcal{N}(0,\sigma^2_\epsilon)\),
although the penalty terms, \(\sigma^2_\epsilon\), must be fixed or
iteratively tuned and are therefore somewhat subjective (Aeberhard et
al., 2018; Methot and Taylor, 2011; Methot and Wetzel, 2013; Xu et al.,
2020). State-space models that treat parameters as unobserved states
can, in principle, avoid such subjectivity by estimating the penalty
terms as variance parameters constraining random effects and maximizing
the marginal likelihood (Thorson, 2019). In this way, state-space models
can allow processes to vary in time while simultaneously estimating
fewer parameters.

Although state-space stock assessments have existed for some time
(Gudmundsson, 1994; Mendelssohn, 1988; Sullivan, 1992), the recent
development of Template Model Builder (TMB, Kristensen et al., 2016)
software to perform efficient Laplace approximation has greatly expanded
their use (Cadigan, 2016; Miller et al., 2016; Nielsen and Berg, 2014).
In addition to the key advantage of objectively estimating variance, or
``data weighting'', parameters, state-space models naturally predict
unobserved states, and therefore handle missing data and short-term
projections in a straightforward way (ICES, 2020). In comparisons with
SCAA models, state-space models have been shown to have larger, more
realistic, uncertainty and lower retrospective bias (Miller and Hyun,
2018; Stock et al., n.d.). \emph{BCS: open to suggestions here\ldots{} I
added the retrospective bias bit back in since it links to the next
paragraph. I know you wrote the lower rho was `negligible' in the
redfish paper, but we did show this in the 2D AR1 survival paper
comparing Base to NAA-2. Others?}

Retrospective bias can occur when changing environmental conditions lead
to changes in productivity that are unaccounted for in stock
assessments, and this is a concern commen to several groundfish stocks
on the Northeast U.S. Shelf (Brooks and Legault, 2016; Tableau et al.,
2018). The Northeast U.S. Shelf ecosystem is rapidly changing, and this
has motivated managers to make the ``continue{[}d{]} development of
stock assessment models that include environmental terms'' a top
priority (Hare et al., 2016). In addition to providing short-term (1-3
years) catch advice with reduced retrospective bias, it is hoped that
environment-linked assessments will help create realistic rebuilding
plans in the medium-term (3-10 years) for stocks that have not rebounded
in response to dramatic decreases in \(F\). For example, Miller et al.
(2016) developed a state-space model for yellowtail flounder with an
environmental effect on recruitment, which reduced retrospective
patterns and residual variance. Additional applications using a similar
state-space framework that include environmental effects on growth,
\(M\), and maturity have also proven promising (Miller and Hyun, 2018;
Miller et al., 2018; O'Leary et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2018).

To address the needs of fisheries management in a changing climate, we
seek an assessment framework that combines both the empirical and
mechanistic approaches. Namely, it should be able to 1) estimate
time-varying parameters as random effects (i.e.~a state-space model),
and 2) include environmental effects directly on biological parameters.
The framework should also allow for easy testing against status quo SCAA
models to ease gradual adoption through the ``research track'' or
``benchmark'' assessment process (Lynch et al., 2018). The objectives of
this manuscript are to introduce the Woods Hole Assessment Model (WHAM)
framework and demonstrate its ability to:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  estimate time- and age-varying random effects on annual changes in
  abundance at age, \(M\), and selectivity;
\item
  fit environmental time-series with process and observation error,
  missing data, and a link to a population process; and
\item
  simulate new data and random effects to conduct self- and cross-tests
  (\emph{sensu} Deroba et al., 2015) to estimate bias in parameters and
  derived quantities.
\end{enumerate}

Throughout, we describe how the above are implemented using the
open-source WHAM software package (Miller and Stock, 2020).

\hypertarget{methods}{%
\section{Methods}\label{methods}}

\hypertarget{model-description}{%
\subsection{Model description}\label{model-description}}

WHAM is a generalization and extension of Miller et al. (2016), which is
in part a re-coding of the Age-Structured Assessment Program (ASAP,
Legault and Restrepo, 1998; Miller and Legault, 2015) in TMB. WHAM
retains characteristics of ASAP, such as its input file structure and
reliance on empirical weight-at-age data, so that existing assessments
in the U.S. Northeast can be easily replicated and tested against models
with state-space and environmental effects in a single framework.

\emph{Either put core model equations here or in supplement}

\hypertarget{processes-with-random-effects}{%
\subsubsection{Processes with random
effects}\label{processes-with-random-effects}}

WHAM primarily diverges from ASAP through the implementation of random
effects on three processes: inter-annual transitions in numbers at age
(\emph{NAA}), natural mortality (\emph{M}), and selectivity (\emph{s}),
as well as allowing effects of environmental covariates (\emph{Ecov}) on
recruitment and natural mortality (but see ASAP4; Miller and Legault,
2015). The environmental covariates and their observations are treated
using state-space models with true, unobserved values treated as random
effects and observation on them having error. Other than environmental
covariates, the processes are assumed to have a two dimensional (2D)
first-order autoregressive (AR1) covariance structure over age and year,
although correlation in either or both dimensions can be turned off. The
2D AR1 structure has been widely used to model deviations by age and
year in the parameters \(F_{a,y}\) (Nielsen and Berg, 2014), \(M_{a,y}\)
(Cadigan, 2016; Stock et al., n.d.), \(s_{a,y}\) (Xu et al., 2019), and
\(N_{a,y}\) (Stock et al., n.d.), as well as in the catch (\(C_{a,y}\))
and survey index (\(I_{a,y}\)) observations (Berg and Nielsen, 2016).

\hypertarget{numbers-at-age-naa}{%
\paragraph{\texorpdfstring{Numbers at age
(\emph{NAA})}{Numbers at age (NAA)}}\label{numbers-at-age-naa}}

The stock equations in WHAM that describe the transitions between
numbers at age are identical to Miller et al. (2016) and Nielsen and
Berg (2014):

\begin{equation}
\label{eq:NAA}
  \text{log}N_{a,y}=\left\{
    \begin{array}{@{}lll@{}}
      \text{log} \left( f(SSB_{y-1}) \right) + \varepsilon_{1,y}, & \text{if}\ a = 1 \\
      \text{log} \left( N_{a-1,y-1} \right) - Z_{a-1,y-1} + \varepsilon_{a,y}, & \text{if}\ 1 < a < A \\
      \text{log} \left( N_{A-1,y-1} e^{-Z_{A-1,y-1}} + N_{A,y-1} e^{-Z_{A,y-1}} \right) + \varepsilon_{A,y}, & \text{if}\ a = A
    \end{array}\right.
\end{equation}

where \(N_{a,y}\) are the numbers at age \emph{a} in year \emph{y},
\emph{Z} is the total mortality rate (\(F + M\)), \(f\) is the
stock-recruit function, \emph{Y} is the total number of observation and
prediction years, and \emph{A} represents the plus-group. In this
analysis we demonstrate four possible models for the \emph{NAA}
deviations, \(\varepsilon_{a,y}\).

m1 is most similar to a SCAA model, where only recruitment deviations,
\(\varepsilon_{1,y}\), are estimated (i.e. \(\varepsilon_{a,y} = 0\) for
\(a > 1\) in Eqn \ref{eq:NAA}). In m1, the recruitment deviations are
assumed to be independent and identically distributed (IID):

\[\varepsilon_{1,y} \sim \mathcal{N}\left( - \frac{\sigma^2_R}{2}, \sigma^2_R \right)\]
The \(- \frac{\sigma^2_R}{2}\) bias correction term is included by
default so that the expected recruitment, \(E(N_{1,y} = R_y)\) equals
the expected \(R_y\) from the stock-recruit function (Methot and Taylor,
2011; Thorson, 2019). This bias correction adjustment can also be turned
off. The only difference between m1 and a SCAA is that annual
recruitments are random effects and \(\sigma^2_R\) is an estimated
parameter within the model.

m2 is the same as m1, except that the recruitment deviations are
stationary AR1 with autocorrelation parameter \(-1<\rho_y<1\):

\[\varepsilon_{1,y+1} \sim \mathcal{N}\left(\rho_y \varepsilon_{1,y} - \frac{\sigma^2_R}{2 (1-\rho^2_y)}, \sigma^2_R \right)\]

m3 is the ``full state-space'' model from Nielsen and Berg (2014) and
Miller et al. (2016), where all numbers at age are independent random
effects and:

\begin{equation}
  \varepsilon_{a,y} \sim \left\{
    \begin{array}{@{}ll@{}}
      \mathcal{N} \left( - \frac{\sigma^2_R}{2}, \sigma^2_R \right), & \text{if}\ a = 1 \\
      \mathcal{N} \left( - \frac{\sigma^2_a}{2}, \sigma^2_a \right), & \text{if}\ a > 1
    \end{array}\right.
\end{equation}

where \(\sigma^2_a\) for all ages \(a > 1\) are assumed to be the same
but different from age \(a = 1\), i.e.~recruitment. This assumption is
sensible because variability of deviations between expected and realized
recruitment are typically larger than deviations from expected abundance
at older ages.

m4 treats the numbers at all ages as random effects, as in m3, but the
\emph{NAA} deviations have a 2D stationary AR1 structure as in Stock et
al. (n.d.):

\[\mathbf{E} \sim \mathcal{MVN} \left( 0, \Sigma \right)\]

where
\(\mathbf{E} = (\varepsilon_{1,1}, \ldots, \varepsilon_{1,Y-1}, \varepsilon_{2,1}, \ldots, \varepsilon_{2,Y-1}, \ldots, \varepsilon_{A,1}, \ldots, \varepsilon_{A,Y-1})'\)
is a vector of all \emph{NAA} deviations, \(\boldsymbol{\Sigma}\) is the
covariance matrix of \(\mathbf{E}\) defined by:

\[ \text{Cov} \left( \varepsilon_{a,y}, \varepsilon_{\tilde{a},\tilde{y}} \right) = \frac{\sigma_a \sigma_{\tilde{a}} \rho^{|a-\tilde{a}|}_{a} \rho^{|y-\tilde{y}|}_{y}}{\left(1-\rho^2_{a}\right) \left(1-\rho^2_{y}\right)}\]
and \(-1<\rho_a<1\) and \(-1<\rho_y<1\) are the AR1 coefficients in age
and year, respectively. As in m3, \(\sigma^2_a\) for all ages \(a > 1\)
are assumed to be the same but different from age \(a = 1\),
\(\sigma^2_R\). The bias correction term for age \(a > 1\) in m4 is
\(- \frac{\sigma^2_a}{2 (1-\rho^2_y)(1-\rho^2_a)}\).

\hypertarget{natural-mortality-m}{%
\paragraph{\texorpdfstring{Natural mortality
(\emph{M})}{Natural mortality (M)}}\label{natural-mortality-m}}

For natural mortality, there are mean parameters for each age,
\(\mu_{M_a}\), each of which may be estimated freely or fixed at the
initial values. The \(\mu_{M_a}\) may also be estimated in sets of ages,
e.g.~estimate one mean \emph{M} shared across ages 3-5,
\(\mu_{M_3} = \mu_{M_4} = \mu_{M_5}\). There is also an option for
\emph{M} to be specified as a function of weight-at-age,
\(M_{a,y} = \mu_M \text{W}^b_{a,y}\), as in Lorenzen (1996) and Miller
and Hyun (2018). Regardless of whether \(\mu_{M_a}\) are fixed or
estimated, WHAM can also be configured to estimate deviations in
\emph{M}, \(\delta_{a,y}\), as random effects analogous to the
\emph{NAA} deviations (Cadigan, 2016; Stock et al., n.d.):

\begin{equation}
  \begin{array}{cc}
    \text{log}\left( M_{a,y} \right) = \mu_{M_a} + \delta_{a,y} \\
    \text{Cov} \left( \delta_{a,y}, \delta_{\tilde{a},\tilde{y}} \right) = \frac{\sigma^2_M \varphi^{|a-\tilde{a}|}_{a} \varphi^{|y-\tilde{y}|}_{y}}{\left(1-\varphi^2_{a}\right) \left(1-\varphi^2_{y}\right)}
  \end{array}
\end{equation}

where \(\sigma^2_M\), \(\varphi_a\), and \(\varphi_y\) are the AR1
variance and correlation coefficients in age and year, respectively.

In this analysis, we demonstrate three alternative \emph{M} random
effects models. For simplicity, all models treat \(\mu_{M_a}\) as known,
as in each of the original assessments. m1 is identical to the base
\emph{NAA} model, with no random effects on \emph{M}
(\(\sigma^2_M = \varphi_a = \varphi_y = 0\) and not estimated). m2
allows IID \emph{M} deviations, estimating \(\sigma^2_M\) but fixing
\(\varphi_a = \varphi_y = 0\). m3 estimates the full 2D AR1 structure
for \emph{M} deviations.

\hypertarget{selectivity-s}{%
\paragraph{\texorpdfstring{Selectivity
(\emph{s})}{Selectivity (s)}}\label{selectivity-s}}

As in ASAP and most other SCAA assessment frameworks, WHAM assumes
separability in the fishing mortality rate by age and year, e.g.
\(F_{a,y} = F_y s_a\), where \(F_y\) is the ``fully selected'' fishing
mortality rate in year \emph{y} and \(s_a\) is the selectivity at age.
We note that this differs from the approach in SAM (Nielsen and Berg,
2014), where the \(F_{a,y}\) are estimated directly as multivariate
random effects without the separability assumption. Three parametric
forms are available (logistic, double-logistic, and
decreasing-logistic), as well as a non-parametric option to estimate
each \(s_a\) individually (``age-specific''). To allow for temporal
changes in selectivity as in ASAP, WHAM can estimate selectivity in
user-specified time blocks. WHAM estimates selectivity parameters on the
logit scale to avoid boundary problems during estimation.

WHAM estimates annual full \(F_y\) and mean selectivity parameters as
fixed effects. Deviations in selectivity parameters can be estimated as
random effects, \(\zeta_{p,y}\), with autocorrelation by parameter
(\emph{p}), year (\emph{y}), both, or neither. This is done similarly to
Xu et al. (2019), except that the deviations are placed on the
parameters instead of the mean \(s_{a,y}\) in order to guarantee that
\(0 < s_{a,y} < 1\). For example, logistic selectivity with two
parameters \(a_{50}\) and \(k\) is estimated as:

\begin{equation}
  \begin{array}{cccc}
    s_{a,y} = \frac{1}{1 + e^{-(a - a_{{50}_y}) / k_y}} \\
    a_{{50}_y} = l_{a_{50}} + \frac{u_{a_{50}} - l_{a_{50}}}{1 + e^{-(\nu_1 + \zeta_{1,y})}} \\
    k_y = l_k + \frac{u_k - l_k}{1 + e^{-(\nu_2 + \zeta_{2,y})}} \\
    \text{Cov} \left( \zeta_{1,y}, \zeta_{2,\tilde{y}} \right) = \frac{\sigma^2_s \phi_p \phi^{|y-\tilde{y}|}_{y}}{\left(1-\phi^2_{p}\right) \left(1-\phi^2_{y}\right)}
  \end{array}
\end{equation}

where \(\nu_1\) is the logit-scale mean \(a_{50}\) parameter with lower
and upper bounds \(l_{a_{50}}\) and \(u_{a_{50}}\), \(\nu_2\) is the
logit-scale mean \(k\) parameter with lower and upper bounds \(l_k\) and
\(u_k\), \(\sigma^2_s\) is the AR1 variance, and \(\phi_p\), and
\(\phi_y\) are the AR1 correlation coefficients by parameter and year.

Below, we demonstrate three models with random effect deviations on
logistic selectivity, akin to those for \emph{M}. m1 treats all numbers
at age as independent random effects (i.e. \emph{NAA} m3) but with no
random effects on \emph{s} (\(\sigma^2_s = \phi_p = \phi_y = 0\) and not
estimated). m2 allows IID \emph{s} deviations, estimating \(\sigma^2_s\)
but fixing \(\phi_p = \phi_y = 0\). m3 estimates the full 2D AR1
structure for \emph{s} deviations.

\hypertarget{environmental-covariates-ecov}{%
\paragraph{\texorpdfstring{Environmental covariates
(\emph{Ecov})}{Environmental covariates (Ecov)}}\label{environmental-covariates-ecov}}

WHAM models environmental covariate data using state-space models with
process and observation components. The true, unobserved values (or
``latent states'', \(X_y\)) are then linked to the population dynamics
equations with user-specified lag. For example, recruitment in year
\emph{y} may be influenced by \(X_{y-1}\) (lag 1), while natural
mortality in year \emph{y} may be influenced by \(X_y\) (lag 0).
Multiple environmental covariates may be included, but only as
independent processes. The \emph{Ecov} and population model years do not
need to match, and missing years are allowed. In particular, including
\emph{Ecov} data in the projection period can be useful.

\hypertarget{process-model}{%
\subparagraph{Process model}\label{process-model}}

There are currently two options in WHAM for the \emph{Ecov} process
model: a normal random walk and AR1. We model the random walk as in
Miller et al. (2016):

\[X_{y+1} | X_y \sim \mathcal{N}\left( X_y, \sigma^2_X\right)\]

where \(\sigma^2_X\) is the process variance and \(X_1\) is estimated as
a fixed effect parameter. One disadvantage of the random walk is that
its variance is nonstationary. In short-term projections, \(\hat{X}_y\)
will be equal to the last estimate with an observation and the
uncertainty of \(\hat{X}_y\) will increase over time. If \(\hat{X}_y\)
influences reference points, this leads to increasing uncertainty in
stock status over time as well (Miller et al., 2016).

For this reason, we generally prefer to model \(X_y\) as a stationary
AR1 process as in Miller et al. (2018):

\begin{equation}
  \begin{array}{cc}
    X_1 \sim \mathcal{N} \left( \mu_X, \frac{\sigma^2_X}{1-\phi^2_X} \right) \\
    X_y \sim \mathcal{N} \left( \mu_X(1-\phi_X) + \phi_X X_{y-1}, \sigma^2_X \right)
  \end{array}
\end{equation}

where \(\mu_X\), \(\sigma^2_X\), and \(|\phi_X| < 1\) are the marginal
mean, variance, and autocorrelation parameters. In addition to having
stationary variance, another important difference between the random
walk and AR1 in short-term projections is that the AR1 will gradually
revert to the mean over time, unless environmental covariate
observations are included in the projection period.

\hypertarget{observation-model}{%
\subparagraph{Observation model}\label{observation-model}}

The environmental covariate observations, \(x_y\), are assumed to be
normally distributed with mean \(X_y\) and variance \(\sigma^2_{x_y}\):

\[x_y | X_y \sim \mathcal{N}\left( X_y, \sigma^2_{x_y} \right)\]

The observation variance in each year, \(\sigma^2_{x_y}\), can be
treated as known with year-specific values (as in Miller et al., 2016)
or one overall value shared among years. They can also be estimated as
parameters, likewise either as yearly values or one overall value. If
included, WHAM estimates yearly \(\sigma^2_{x_y}\) as random effects
with parameters \(\mu_{\sigma_x}\) and \(\sigma_{\sigma_x}\):

\[\sigma^2_{x_y} \sim \mathcal{N} \left( \mu_{\sigma_x}, \sigma^2_{\sigma_x} \right)\]

\hypertarget{link-to-population}{%
\subparagraph{Link to population}\label{link-to-population}}

WHAM currently provides options to link the modeled environmental
covariate, \(X_y\), to the population dynamics via recruitment or
natural mortality. It is also sometimes useful to fit the \emph{Ecov}
model without a link to the population dynamics so that models with and
without environmental effects have the same data in the likelihood and
can be compared via AIC.

In the case of recruitment, the options follow Fry (1971) and Iles and
Beverton (1998): ``controlling'' (density-independent mortality),
``limiting'' (carrying capacity effect, e.g. \(X_y\) determines the
amount of suitable habitat), ``lethal'' (threshold effect, i.e. \(R_t\)
goes to 0 at some \(X_y\) value), ``masking'' (\(X_y\) decreases
\(\text{d}R/\text{d}SSB\), as expected if \(X_y\) affects metabolism or
growth), and ``directive'' (e.g.~behavioral). Of these, WHAM currently
allows controlling, limiting, or masking effects in the Beverton-Holt
stock-recruit function, and controlling or masking effects in the Ricker
function. For natural mortality, environmental effects are placed on
\(\mu_M\), shared across ages.

Regardless of where the environment-population link is, the effect can
be either linear or polynomial. Nonlinear effects of environmental
covariates are common in ecology, and quadratic effects are to be
expected in cases where intermediate values are optimal (Agostini et
al., 2008; Brett, 1971). WHAM includes a function to calculate
orthogonal polynomials in TMB, akin to the \texttt{poly()} function in
\texttt{R}.

In this analysis, we compare five models with limiting effects on
Beverton-Holt recruitment:

\[\hat{R}_{y+1} = \frac{\alpha \text{SSB}_{y}}{1 + e^{\beta_0 + \beta_1 X_{y} + \beta_2 X^2_{y}} \text{SSB}_y}\]

where \(\text{SSB}_y\) is spawning stock biomass in year \emph{y},
\(\alpha\) and \(\beta_0\) are the standard parameters of the
Beverton-Holt function, and \(\beta_1\) and \(\beta_2\) are polynomial
effect terms that modify \(\beta_0\) based on the value of the estimated
environmental covariate, \(X_y\).

m1 treats \(X_y\) as a random walk (\(\phi_X = 1\)) but does not include
an effect on recruitment (\(\beta_1 = \beta_2 = 0\)). We include m1 in
order to compare AIC of the original model to those with effects on
recruitment. m2 and m3 also treat \(X_y\) as a random walk, but m2
estimates \(\beta_1\) and m3 estimates both \(\beta_1\) and \(\beta_2\).
m4 and m5 estimate \(X_y\) as an AR1 process, and m4 estimates
\(\beta_1\) and m5 estimates both \(\beta_1\) and \(\beta_2\).

\hypertarget{population-observation-model}{%
\subsubsection{Population observation
model}\label{population-observation-model}}

The population observation likelihood components are the same as in
ASAP: aggregate catch and abundance index for each fleet and survey, and
age composition for each fleet and survey.

\hypertarget{aggreate-catch-and-indices}{%
\paragraph{Aggreate catch and
indices}\label{aggreate-catch-and-indices}}

The predicted catch at age for fleet \(i\), \(\hat{C}_{a,y,i}\), is a
function of \(N_{a,y}\), \(M_{a,y}\), \(F_{y,i}\), \(s_{a,y,i}\), and
empirical weight at age, \(W_{a,y,i}\) \[
\hat{C}_{a,y,i} = N_{a,y} W_{a,y,i}\left(1- e^{-Z_{a,y}}\right)\frac{F_{a,y,i}}{Z_{a,y}}.
\] The log-aggregate catch \(\hat{C}_{y,i} = \sum_a \hat{C}_{a,y,i}\)
observation is assumed to have a normal distribution \begin{equation}
\label{eq:catch}
  \begin{array}{ccc}
    \text{log}(C_{y,i}) \sim \mathcal{N}\left( \text{log}(\hat{C}_{y,i}) - \frac{\sigma^2_{C_{y,i}}}{2}, \sigma^2_{C_{y,i}}\right).
  \end{array}
\end{equation} where the standard devation \[
\sigma_{C_{y,i}} = e^{\eta_i}\sigma_{\tilde{C}_{y,i}}
\] is a function of an input standard deviation
\(\sigma_{\tilde{C}_{y,i}}\) and a fleet-specific parameter \(\eta_i\)
that is fixed at 0 by default, but may be estimated. The bias correction
term, \(- \frac{\sigma^2_{C_{y,i}}}{2}\), is included by default based
on Aldrin et al. (2020) but can be turned off.

Observations of aggregate indices of abundance are handled identically
to the aggregate catch as in Eqn. \ref{eq:catch} except that for index
\(i\) the predicted index at age is
\[\hat{I}_{a,y,i} = q_i s_{a,y,i} N_{a,y}W_{a,y,i} e^{-Z_{a,y}f_{y,i}}\]
where \(q_i\) is the catchability and \(f_{y,i}\) is the fraction of the
annual time step elapsed when the index is observed. There are options
for indices to be in terms of abundance (numbers) or biomass and
\(W_{a,y,i} = 1\) for the former.

\hypertarget{catch-and-index-age-composition}{%
\paragraph{Catch and index age
composition}\label{catch-and-index-age-composition}}

WHAM includes several options for the catch and index age compositions
including multinomial (default), Dirichlet, Dirichlet-multinomial,
logistic normal and a zero-one inflated logistic normal. In all of the
applications and simulation studies here, we assumed age composition
observations were nultinomial distributed.

\hypertarget{projections}{%
\subsubsection{Projections}\label{projections}}

The default settings for short-term projections follow common practice
for stock assessments in the U.S. Northeast: the population is projected
three years using the average selectivity, maturity, weight, and natural
mortality at age from the last five model years to calculate reference
points. WHAM implements similar options as ASAP for specifying \(F_y\)
in the projection years: terminal year \(F_y\), average \(F\)over
specified years, \(F_{X\%}\) (\(F\) at X\% SPR, where X is specified and
40 by default), \emph{should we quickly include an option for projecting
\(F_{MSY}\)}, user-specified \(F_y\), or \(F\) derived from
user-specified catch. For models with random effects on \emph{NAA},
\emph{M}, or \emph{Ecov}, the default is to continue the stochastic
process into the projection years. WHAM does not currently do this for
selectivity because, like \(F\), it is a function of management.
Selectivity is taken as the average of recent model years.

If the \emph{Ecov} data extend beyond the population model years, WHAM
will fit the \emph{Ecov} model to all available data and use the
estimated \(X_y\) in projections. This may often be the case because
lags can exist in both the physical-biological mechanism and the
assessment process. As an example, a model with an \emph{Ecov} effect on
recruitment may link physical conditions in year \(t\) to recruitment in
year \(t+1\), and the assessment may be conducted in year \(t\) using
population data through year \(t-1\). In this case, 3-year population
projections only need the \emph{Ecov} model to be projected one year.
While the default handling of \emph{Ecov} projections is to continue the
stochastic process, WHAM includes options to use terminal year \(x_y\),
\(x_y\) averaged over specified years, or specified \(x_y\). The option
to specify \(x_y\) allows users to investigate how alternative climate
projections may affect the stock.

\hypertarget{fits-to-original-datasets}{%
\subsection{Fits to original datasets}\label{fits-to-original-datasets}}

We fit the models described above to data from five stocks with a broad
range of life history and status: Southern New England-Mid Atlantic
(SNEMA) yellowtail flounder, butterfish, North Sea cod, Icelandic
herring, and Georges Bank haddock (Tables \ref{tab:model-descriptions}
and \ref{tab:stock-list}). We fit the \emph{NAA} random effects models
to all five stocks since these represent core WHAM functionality. We
chose to highlight one stock each for the \emph{M}, \emph{s}, and
\emph{Ecov} processes because all models did not converge for all stocks
and processes: butterfish (\emph{M}), Georges Bank haddock (\emph{s}),
and SNEMA yellowtail flounder (\emph{Ecov}). None of the original
assessments estimated \emph{M}. Except for the haddock \emph{s}
demonstration, we used the same selectivity parameterization and time
blocks as in the original assessments. We used the m3 \emph{NAA} model
(all NAA deviations are IID random effects) in the \emph{s} and
\emph{Ecov} demonstrations, but the m1 \emph{NAA} model (only
recruitment deviations are IID random effects) for the \emph{M}
demonstrations, because the NAA transitions can be interpreted as
survival and including random effect deviations on both NAA and \emph{M}
can lead to model non-convergence (Stock et al., n.d.). Within each
process, we compared the performance of the different random effects
models using AIC.

We fit all models using the open-source statistical software R (R Core
Team, 2020) and TMB (Kristensen et al., 2016), as implemented in the R
package WHAM (Miller and Stock, 2020). Documentation and tutorials for
how to specify additional random effect structures in WHAM are available
at \url{https://timjmiller.github.io/wham/}.

\hypertarget{simulation-tests}{%
\subsection{Simulation tests}\label{simulation-tests}}

After fitting each model to the original datasets, we used the
simulation feature of TMB to conduct self- and cross-tests (\emph{sensu}
Deroba et al., 2015). For each model, we generated 100 sets of new data
and random effects, keeping the fixed effect parameters constant at
values estimated in original fits. We then re-fit all models to datasets
simulated under each as an operating model. We calculated the relative
error in parameters constraining random effects (Table
\ref{tab:model-descriptions}) and quantities of interest, such as
spawning stock biomass (SSB), \(F\),
\(\frac{\text{B}}{\text{B}_{40\%}}\), \(\frac{F}{F_{40\%}}\), and \(R\).
We calculated relative error as \(\frac{\hat{\theta_i}}{\theta}-1\),
where \(\theta\) is the true value used to simulate data and
\(\theta_i\) is the value estimated in simulation \emph{i}. To estimate
bias of each estimation model for a given operating model, we calculated
95\% confidence intervals of the median relative error using the
binomial distribution (Thompson, 1936). Finally, for each operating
model we calculated the proportion of simulations in which each
estimation model converged and had the lowest AIC, aggregated across
stocks.

\hypertarget{results}{%
\section{Results}\label{results}}

\hypertarget{original-datasets}{%
\subsection{Original datasets}\label{original-datasets}}

2D AR1 structure performed well across processes and stocks (Fig.
\ref{fig:daic}).

\hypertarget{numbers-at-age}{%
\subsubsection{Numbers-at-age}\label{numbers-at-age}}

Fig. \ref{fig:devs-ICEherring-naa}.

\hypertarget{natural-mortality}{%
\subsubsection{Natural mortality}\label{natural-mortality}}

Fig. \ref{fig:devs-butterfish-m}.

\hypertarget{selectivity}{%
\subsubsection{Selectivity}\label{selectivity}}

Fig. \ref{fig:devs-GBhaddock-sel}.

\hypertarget{ecov-recruitment}{%
\subsubsection{Ecov-Recruitment}\label{ecov-recruitment}}

Fig. \ref{fig:devs-SNEMAYT-ecov}.

\hypertarget{simulation-tests-1}{%
\subsection{Simulation tests}\label{simulation-tests-1}}

Not all models converged. Fig. \ref{fig:aic-cross}.

Bias is usually so tiny and not significant based on confidence
intervals when the estimation and operating model are consistent. Bias
is also often small when more complex models are fitted to less
complicated operating model simulations. Bias of variance parameters is
as expected (negative). REML should be used if more accurate estimation
of these is a priority.

(Miller et al., 2018) The biased maximum likelihood estimation of the
autoregres- sive process parameters we found in the simulation study was
expected (Wilson 1989). The reduction in bias for most of these
parameters using REML estimation was also expected (Cheang and Reinsel
2000), but substantial bias still remained,

\hypertarget{numbers-at-age-1}{%
\subsubsection{Numbers-at-age}\label{numbers-at-age-1}}

Fig. \ref{fig:estpar-naa}.

Fig. \ref{fig:rel-error-ICEherring-naa}.

\hypertarget{natural-mortality-1}{%
\subsubsection{Natural mortality}\label{natural-mortality-1}}

Fig. \ref{fig:estpar-m}.

Fig. \ref{fig:rel-error-butterfish-m}.

\hypertarget{selectivity-1}{%
\subsubsection{Selectivity}\label{selectivity-1}}

Fig. \ref{fig:estpar-sel}.

Fig. \ref{fig:rel-error-GBhaddock-sel}.

\hypertarget{ecov-recruitment-1}{%
\subsubsection{Ecov-Recruitment}\label{ecov-recruitment-1}}

Fig. \ref{fig:estpar-ecov}.

\hypertarget{discussion}{%
\section{Discussion}\label{discussion}}

\hypertarget{overview}{%
\subsection{Overview}\label{overview}}

Our results suggest that the WHAM package can be a useful tool for stock
assessment when environmental effects on recruitment or natural
mortality, variation in selectivity or natural mortality, or stochastic
changes in the numbers at age are of interest. The simulation tests
showed negligible or no bias in estimation of important assessment
outputs (SSB, F, stock and harvest status).

We described WHAM. Sim tests showed no bias in self-tests (when
estimation model matched operating model). Some bias in cross-tests.

Contrast mechanistic vs.~empirical approaches. Empirical approaches
allows time-varying productivity and with AR1 can propagate effect of
changing productivity in short-term projections (Stock et al., n.d.).
However, the empirical approach cannot predict values beyond extremes in
observed time-series (\emph{TJM: This is always true? I suspect certain
types of time series models might predict outside of time series. E.g.,
if there is an increase with the last observation being the greatest,
some higher order AR models might predict the next few observations
higher than the last}). This is an issue because many ecosystems are
changing to such extent that conditions in the near future have never
been observed. E.g. last time it was close to this warm on the U.S.
Northeast Shelf was the 1940s, and few fisheries or oceanographic
time-series stretch back that far. Thus, longer term projections likely
require mechanistic approach. Think about other sources of data? Fish
catch, not just surveys + age data? Continuous Plankton Recorder (other
side of Atlantic, but correlated?). 1951 was almost as warm (annual
mean), but warm in winter instead of summer (diff seasonal change).

Mechanistic approach: more likely to find environmental effects in cases
with:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  history of overfishing (Free et al., 2019)
\item
  more rapid environmental change (Free et al., 2019)
\item
  stocks at edge of species' range (Free et al., 2019)
\item
  opportunistic species (short-lived) vs.~longer-lived (Free et al.,
  2019)
\item
  longer time series
\item
  stronger signals (wider ranges of observed stock status and
  environmental conditions)
\item
  periodic signal where we've recorded more than one cycle (e.g.~PDO/sst
  sardine)
\item
  lower trophic level (e.g.~generally tighter relationship between PO
  and zooplankton, then small pelagics TL2, then TL3+). PO forecasting
  group look at zooplankton indices? See Perretti 2017 (recruitment
  regime shifts)
\end{itemize}

Reducing uncertainty may be just as valuable as improving accuracy /
reducing bias.

\hypertarget{differences-from-other-assessment-model-frameworks}{%
\subsection{Differences from other assessment model
frameworks}\label{differences-from-other-assessment-model-frameworks}}

How is WHAM different from SAM?

\emph{Not sure where to put this\ldots{} some could be in Intro or
Discussion. Definitely will be a question in readers' minds so may be
good to introduce early?}

WHAM estimates annual full F as fixed effects and selectivity of surveys
or fisheries as constant or time-varying random effects with various
autoregressive assumptions possible. SAM estimates FAA as a multivariate
log-normal random walk. WHAM can estimate interannual transitions as
random walk processes like SAM or as a function of autoregressive
deviations. Alternatively (or simultaneously) WHAM can estimate
deviations in natural mortality as autoregressive processes like NCAM
(Cadigan, 2016). Uniquely, WHAM can model multiple covariate time series
as state-space processes and include their effects (nonlinearly) in
various ways on recruitment or natural mortality.

Like SS, ASAP, BAM, WHAM treats aggregate and composition observations
separately for fisheries and indices. This differs from SAM where
observations of numbers at age are treated as multivariate log-normal.

Most assessments in the U.S. assume separability in \(F_{a,t}\),
estimate \(F_t\) and \(Sel_a\). WHAM does this. SAM estimates
\(F_{a,t}\) directly. WHAM and SAM also make different separability
assumptions for the catch/index data (aggregate total + age comps vs.
\(C_{a,t}\) directly). Should be similar (?) but could test.

To move from traditional SCAA models to state-space models with random
effects in the Northeast US, WHAM can be configured to fit models very
similar to ASAP and therefore bridge between these frameworks. Goal is
to replicate ASAP assessments in the U.S. Northeast. Can easily turn
on/off random effects.

Observation model is natural for landings data that are measured as
total weight plus age composition sampling. Age composition sampling
often done separately with survey data.

Treating \(F\) and \(Sel\) separately can be useful for projections.
Oftentimes we want to specify \(F\) in projections to calculate a
reference point, as opposed to continuing a \(F\) time-series process.

\hypertarget{future-work}{%
\subsection{Future work}\label{future-work}}

WHAM will be used in upcoming research track assessments. Could
transition to operational. Potential to improve several NEFSC
assessments.

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  2D AR(1) selectivity. Most assessments in the U.S. assume separability
  in \(F_{a,t}\), i.e.~estimate \(F_t\) and \(Sel_a\). WHAM does this.
  SAM estimates \(F_{a,t}\) directly. WHAM and SAM make different
  separability assumptions for the catch/index data as well (aggregate
  total + age comps vs. \(C_{a,t}\) directly). Should be similar (?) but
  could test.
\item
  How many time/age-varying random effects can be estimated
  simultaneously? Stock et al. (n.d.) estimated random effect deviations
  in abundance at age and \(M\), as well as an environmental covariate
  effect on recruitment.
\item
  Ecov-Recruitment simulation study. How much information does Ecov need
  to have to be useful?
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{extensions}{%
\subsection{Extensions}\label{extensions}}

\hypertarget{multivariate-spatiotemporal-environmental-data}{%
\subsubsection{Multivariate spatiotemporal environmental
data}\label{multivariate-spatiotemporal-environmental-data}}

Most examples that include environment-recruitment effects are
univariate, but in many cases it is likely that multiple factors have to
align for successful recruitment (e.g.~temperature and currents for
Nassau Grouper).

\hypertarget{lengthgrowth-estimation}{%
\subsubsection{Length/growth estimation}\label{lengthgrowth-estimation}}

\hypertarget{ecov-models}{%
\subsubsection{Ecov models}\label{ecov-models}}

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  AR(k)
\item
  splines
\item
  Gaussian process/EDM/Munch/Sugihara
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{conclusion}{%
\subsection{Conclusion}\label{conclusion}}

Development of TMB has facilitated significant advancement in fisheries
assessment, allowing us to treat population processes as random effects.
A grand challenge in fisheries is to assess and manage stocks in a
changing environment. Increasingly have the environmental data.
Population time-series are lengthening. WHAM is a step in this
direction.

\hypertarget{acknowledgements}{%
\subsection*{Acknowledgements}\label{acknowledgements}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsection}{Acknowledgements}

This research was performed while BCS held an NRC Research Associateship
award at the NEFSC. NOAA Fish \& Climate grant number ??.

\pagebreak

\hypertarget{supplementary-material}{%
\subsection*{Supplementary material}\label{supplementary-material}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsection}{Supplementary material}

More figures.

\pagebreak

\hypertarget{references}{%
\subsection*{References}\label{references}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsection}{References}

\hypertarget{refs}{}
\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-aeberhard2018Review}{}%
Aeberhard, W.H., Mills Flemming, J., Nielsen, A., 2018. Review of
State-Space Models for Fisheries Science. Annu. Rev. Stat. Appl. 5,
215--235. \url{https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-statistics-031017-100427}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-agostini2008Climateocean}{}%
Agostini, V., Hendrix, A., Hollowed, A., Wilson, C., Pierce, S.,
Francis, R., 2008. Climate-ocean variability and Pacific hake: A
geostatistical modeling approach. Journal of Marine Systems 71,
237--248. \url{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmarsys.2007.01.010}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-aldrin2020Specification}{}%
Aldrin, M., Tvete, I., Aanes, S., Subbey, S., 2020. The specification of
the data model part in the SAM model matters. Fisheries Research 229,
105585. \url{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fishres.2020.105585}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-berg2016Accounting}{}%
Berg, C.W., Nielsen, A., 2016. Accounting for correlated observations in
an age-based state-space stock assessment model. ICES J Mar Sci 73,
1788--1797. \url{https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsw046}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-brett1971Energetic}{}%
Brett, J.R., 1971. Energetic responses of salmon to temperature. A study
of some thermal relations in the physiology and freshwater ecology of
sockeye salmon (\emph{Oncorhynchus} \emph{Nerka}). Am Zool 11, 99--113.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1093/icb/11.1.99}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-brooks2016Retrospective}{}%
Brooks, E.N., Legault, C.M., 2016. Retrospective forecasting evaluating
performance of stock projections for New England groundfish stocks. Can.
J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 73, 935--950.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfas-2015-0163}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-cadigan2016Statespace}{}%
Cadigan, N.G., 2016. A state-space stock assessment model for northern
cod, including under-reported catches and variable natural mortality
rates. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 73, 296--308.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfas-2015-0047}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-deoliveira2005Limits}{}%
De Oliveira, J., Butterworth, D., 2005. Limits to the use of
environmental indices to reduce risk and/or increase yield in the South
African anchovy fishery. African Journal of Marine Science 27, 191--203.
\url{https://doi.org/10.2989/18142320509504078}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-deroba2015Simulation}{}%
Deroba, J.J., Butterworth, D.S., Methot, R.D., De Oliveira, J.a.A.,
Fernandez, C., Nielsen, A., Cadrin, S.X., Dickey-Collas, M., Legault,
C.M., Ianelli, J., Valero, J.L., Needle, C.L., O'Malley, J.M., Chang,
Y.-J., Thompson, G.G., Canales, C., Swain, D.P., Miller, D.C.M.,
Hintzen, N.T., Bertignac, M., Ibaibarriaga, L., Silva, A., Murta, A.,
Kell, L.T., de Moor, C.L., Parma, A.M., Dichmont, C.M., Restrepo, V.R.,
Ye, Y., Jardim, E., Spencer, P.D., Hanselman, D.H., Blaylock, J., Mood,
M., Hulson, P.-J.F., 2015. Simulation testing the robustness of stock
assessment models to error: Some results from the ICES strategic
initiative on stock assessment methods. ICES J Mar Sci 72, 19--30.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fst237}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-free2019Impacts}{}%
Free, C.M., Thorson, J.T., Pinsky, M.L., Oken, K.L., Wiedenmann, J.,
Jensen, O.P., 2019. Impacts of historical warming on marine fisheries
production. Science 363, 979--983.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aau1758}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-fry1971Effect}{}%
Fry, F., 1971. The effect of environmental factors on the physiology of
fish, in: Fish Physiology. Elsevier, pp. 1--98.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1016/S1546-5098(08)60146-6}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-garstang1900Impoverishment}{}%
Garstang, W., 1900. The Impoverishment of the Sea. A Critical Summary of
the Experimental and Statistical Evidence bearing upon the Alleged
Depletion of the Trawling Grounds. Journal of the Marine Biological
Association of the United Kingdom 6, 1--69.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1017/S0025315400072374}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-gudmundsson1994Time}{}%
Gudmundsson, G., 1994. Time series analysis of catch-at-age
observations. Applied Statistics 43, 117--126.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-hare2016Northeast}{}%
Hare, J.A., Borggaard, D.L., Friedland, K.D., Anderson, J., Burns, P.,
Chu, K., Clay, P.M., Collins, M.J., Cooper, P., Fratantoni, P.S.,
Johnson, M.R., Manderson, J.P., Milke, L., Miller, T.J., Orphanides,
C.D., Saba, V.S., 2016. Northeast Regional Action Plan - NOAA Fisheries
Climate Science Strategy (No. NMFS-NE-239). NOAA Fisheries, Northeast
Fisheries Science Center, Woods Hole, MA.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-hill2018Assessment}{}%
Hill, K.T., Crone, P.R., Zwolinski, J.P., 2018. Assessment of the
Pacific sardine resource in 2018 for U.S. Management in 2018-2019 (No.
NOAA Technical Memorandum NMFS-SWFSC-600). US Department of Commerce.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-hjort1914Fluctuations}{}%
Hjort, J., 1914. Fluctuations in the great fisheries of Northern Europe
viewed in the light of biological research. Rapports et Procès-Verbaux
des Réunions du Conseil Permanent International Pour L'Exploration de la
Mer 20, 1--228.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-ices2020Workshop}{}%
ICES, 2020. Workshop on the Review and Future of State Space Stock
Assessment Models in ICES (WKRFSAM). ICES Scientific Reports 2, 23p.
\url{https://doi.org/10.17895/ices.pub.6004}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-iles1998Stock}{}%
Iles, T.C., Beverton, R.J.H., 1998. Stock, recruitment and moderating
processes in flatfish. Journal of Sea Research, Proceedings of the Third
International Symposium on Flatfish Ecology, Part II 39, 41--55.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1016/S1385-1101(97)00022-1}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-kristensen2016TMB}{}%
Kristensen, K., Nielsen, A., Berg, C., Skaug, H., Bell, B.M., 2016. TMB:
Automatic differentiation and Laplace approximation. Journal of
Statistical Software 70, 1--21.
\url{https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v070.i05}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-larkin1996Concepts}{}%
Larkin, P., 1996. Concepts and issues in marine ecosystem management.
Reviews in Fish Biology and Fisheries 6, 139--164.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00182341}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-legault1998Flexible}{}%
Legault, C.M., Restrepo, V.R., 1998. A Flexible Forward Age-Structured
Assessment Program (No. 49).

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-link2002What}{}%
Link, J.S., 2002. What Does Ecosystem-Based Fisheries Management Mean?
Fisheries 27, 5.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-lorenzen1996Relationship}{}%
Lorenzen, K., 1996. The relationship between body weight and natural
mortality in juvenile and adult fish: A comparison of natural ecosystems
and aquaculture. Journal of Fish Biology 49, 627--642.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1095-8649.1996.tb00060.x}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-lynch2018Implementing}{}%
Lynch, P.D., Methot, R.D., Link, J.S. (Eds.), 2018. Implementing a Next
Generation Stock Assessment Enterprise. An Update to the NOAA Fisheries
Stock Assessment Improvement Plan, in:. U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech.
Memo. NMFS-F/ SPO-183, p. 127. \url{https://doi.org/10.7755/TMSPO.183}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-mcclatchie2010Reassessment}{}%
McClatchie, S., Goericke, R., Auad, G., Hill, K., 2010. Re-assessment of
the stockRecruit and temperatureRecruit relationships for Pacific
sardine (Sardinops sagax). Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 67, 1782--1790.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1139/F10-101}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-mendelssohn1988Problems}{}%
Mendelssohn, R., 1988. Some problems in estimating population sizes from
catch-at-age data. Fishery Bulletin 86, 617--630.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-methot2011Adjusting}{}%
Methot, R.D., Taylor, I.G., 2011. Adjusting for bias due to variability
of estimated recruitments in fishery assessment models. Can. J. Fish.
Aquat. Sci. 68, 1744--1760. \url{https://doi.org/10.1139/f2011-092}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-methot2013Stock}{}%
Methot, R.D., Wetzel, C.R., 2013. Stock synthesis: A biological and
statistical framework for fish stock assessment and fishery management.
Fisheries Research 142, 86--99.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fishres.2012.10.012}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-miller2016Statespace}{}%
Miller, T.J., Hare, J.A., Alade, L.A., 2016. A state-space approach to
incorporating environmental effects on recruitment in an age-structured
assessment model with an application to southern New England yellowtail
flounder. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 73,
1261--1270. \url{https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfas-2015-0339}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-miller2018Evaluating}{}%
Miller, T.J., Hyun, S.-Y., 2018. Evaluating evidence for alternative
natural mortality and process error assumptions using a state-space,
age-structured assessment model. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and
Aquatic Sciences 75, 691--703.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfas-2017-0035}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-miller2015Technical}{}%
Miller, T.J., Legault, C.M., 2015. Technical details for ASAP version 4
(No. Ref Doc. 15-17). US Dept Commer, Northeast Fish Sci Cent.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-miller2018Temporal}{}%
Miller, T.J., O'Brien, L., Fratantoni, P.S., 2018. Temporal and
environmental variation in growth and maturity and effects on management
reference points of Georges Bank Atlantic cod. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci.
1--13. \url{https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfas-2017-0124}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-miller2020Woods}{}%
Miller, T.J., Stock, B.C., 2020. The Woods Hole Assessment Model (WHAM).

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-myers1998When}{}%
Myers, R.A., 1998. When do environment-recruitment correlations work?
Reviews in Fish Biology and Fisheries 8, 285--305.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-nielsen2014Estimation}{}%
Nielsen, A., Berg, C.W., 2014. Estimation of time-varying selectivity in
stock assessments using state-space models. Fisheries Research 158,
96--101. \url{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fishres.2014.01.014}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-oleary2019Understanding}{}%
O'Leary, C.A., Miller, T.J., Thorson, J.T., Nye, J.A., 2019.
Understanding historical summer flounder ( \emph{Paralichthys}
\emph{Dentatus} ) abundance patterns through the incorporation of
oceanography-dependent vital rates in Bayesian hierarchical models. Can.
J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 76, 1275--1294.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfas-2018-0092}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-patrick2015Myths}{}%
Patrick, W.S., Link, J.S., 2015. Myths that Continue to Impede Progress
in Ecosystem-Based Fisheries Management. Fisheries 40, 155--160.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1080/03632415.2015.1024308}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-pershing2015Slow}{}%
Pershing, A.J., Alexander, M.A., Hernandez, C.M., Kerr, L.A., Bris,
A.L., Mills, K.E., Nye, J.A., Record, N.R., Scannell, H.A., Scott, J.D.,
Sherwood, G.D., Thomas, A.C., 2015. Slow adaptation in the face of rapid
warming leads to collapse of the Gulf of Maine cod fishery. Science 350,
809--812. \url{https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aac9819}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-punt2014Fisheries}{}%
Punt, A.E., A'mar, T., Bond, N.A., Butterworth, D.S., de Moor, C.L., De
Oliveira, J.A.A., Haltuch, M.A., Hollowed, A.B., Szuwalski, C., 2014.
Fisheries management under climate and environmental uncertainty:
Control rules and performance simulation. ICES J Mar Sci 71, 2208--2220.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fst057}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-rcoreteam2020Language}{}%
R Core Team, 2020. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-rose2015Northern}{}%
Rose, G.A., Rowe, S., 2015. Northern cod comeback. Can. J. Fish. Aquat.
Sci. 72, 1789--1798. \url{https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfas-2015-0346}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-shelton2006Fishing}{}%
Shelton, P.A., Sinclair, A.F., Chouinard, G.A., Mohn, R., Duplisea,
D.E., 2006. Fishing under low productivity conditions is further
delaying recovery of Northwest Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua). Can. J.
Fish. Aquat. Sci. 63, 235--238. \url{https://doi.org/10.1139/f05-253}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-shotwell2014Biophysical}{}%
Shotwell, S.K., Hanselman, D.H., Belkin, I.M., 2014. Toward biophysical
synergy: Investigating advection along the Polar Front to identify
factors influencing Alaska sablefish recruitment. Deep Sea Research Part
II: Topical Studies in Oceanography 107, 40--53.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dsr2.2012.08.024}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-stockthisissueImplementing}{}%
Stock, B.C., Xu, H., Miller, T.J., Thorson, J.T., Nye, J.A., n.d.
Implementing a 2-dimensional smoother on either survival or natural
mortality improves a state-space assessment model for Southern New
England-Mid Atlantic yellowtail flounder.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-stock2011Use}{}%
Stock, C.A., Alexander, M.A., Bond, N.A., Brander, K.M., Cheung, W.W.,
Curchitser, E.N., Delworth, T.L., Dunne, J.P., Griffies, S.M., Haltuch,
M.A., Hare, J.A., Hollowed, A.B., Lehodey, P., Levin, S.A., Link, J.S.,
Rose, K.A., Rykaczewski, R.R., Sarmiento, J.L., Stouffer, R.J., Schwing,
F.B., Vecchi, G.A., Werner, F.E., 2011. On the use of IPCC-class models
to assess the impact of climate on Living Marine Resources. Progress in
Oceanography 88, 1--27.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pocean.2010.09.001}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-sullivan1992Kalman}{}%
Sullivan, P.J., 1992. A Kalman filter approach to catch-at-length
analysis. Biometrics 48, 237--257.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-tableau2018Decadal}{}%
Tableau, A., Collie, J.S., Bell, R.J., Minto, C., 2018. Decadal changes
in the productivity of New England fish populations. Can. J. Fish.
Aquat. Sci. 76, 1528--1540.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfas-2018-0255}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-thompson1936Confidence}{}%
Thompson, W.R., 1936. On Confidence Ranges for the Median and Other
Expectation Distributions for Populations of Unknown Distribution Form.
Ann. Math. Statist. 7, 122--128.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177732502}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-thorson2019Perspective}{}%
Thorson, J.T., 2019. Perspective: Let's simplify stock assessment by
replacing tuning algorithms with statistics. Fisheries Research 217,
133--139. \url{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fishres.2018.02.005}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-walters1988Research}{}%
Walters, C.J., Collie, J.S., 1988. Is Research on Environmental Factors
Useful to Fisheries Management? Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 45,
1848--1854. \url{https://doi.org/10.1139/f88-217}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-xu2018Evaluating}{}%
Xu, H., Miller, T.J., Hameed, S., Alade, L.A., Nye, J.A., 2018.
Evaluating the utility of the Gulf Stream Index for predicting
recruitment of Southern New England-Mid Atlantic yellowtail flounder.
Fisheries Oceanography 27, 85--95.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1111/fog.12236}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-xu2020Comparing}{}%
Xu, H., Thorson, J.T., Methot, R.D., 2020. Comparing the performance of
three data weighting methods when allowing for time-varying selectivity.
Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 77, 247--263.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfas-2019-0107}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-xu2019New}{}%
Xu, H., Thorson, J.T., Methot, R.D., Taylor, I.G., 2019. A new
semi-parametric method for autocorrelated age- and time-varying
selectivity in age-structured assessment models. Can. J. Fish. Aquat.
Sci. 76, 268--285. \url{https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfas-2017-0446}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-zwolinski2012Cold}{}%
Zwolinski, J.P., Demer, D.A., 2012. A cold oceanographic regime with
high exploitation rates in the Northeast Pacific forecasts a collapse of
the sardine stock. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109,
4175--4180. \url{https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1113806109}

\pagebreak

\begin{landscape}
\begin{table}

\caption{\label{tab:model-descriptions}Model descriptions and estimated parameters. Parameter descriptions and equations are given in text. Note that the base model in the $M$ module is NAA m1, and the base model in the Selectivity and Ecov-Recruitment modules is NAA m3. Ecov m1 fits the Cold Pool Index data and estimates $\sigma_x$ in order to allow comparison to m2-m5 using AIC (same data needed in likelihood).}
\centering
\begin{tabular}[t]{lll}
\toprule
Model & Description & Estimated parameters\\
\midrule
\addlinespace[0.3em]
\multicolumn{3}{l}{\textbf{Numbers-at-age (NAA)}}\\
\hspace{1em}m1: SCAA (IID) & Recruitment deviations are IID random effects & $\sigma_R$\\
\hspace{1em}m2: SCAA (AR1) & Recruitment deviations are autocorrelated (AR1) random effects & $\sigma_R$, $\rho_y$\\
\hspace{1em}m3: NAA (IID) & All NAA deviations are IID random effects & $\sigma_R$, $\sigma_a$\\
\hspace{1em}m4: NAA (2D AR1) & All NAA deviations are random effects with correlation by year and age (2D AR1) & $\sigma_R$, $\sigma_a$, $\rho_y$, $\rho_a$\\
\addlinespace[0.3em]
\multicolumn{3}{l}{\textbf{Natural mortality ($M$)}}\\
\hspace{1em}m1: none & No random effects on $M$ & $\sigma_R$\\
\hspace{1em}m2: IID & $M$ deviations are IID random effects & $\sigma_R$, $\sigma_M$\\
\hspace{1em}m3: 2D AR1 & $M$ deviations are random effects with correlation by year and age (2D AR1) & $\sigma_R$, $\sigma_M$, $\varphi_y$, $\varphi_a$\\
\addlinespace[0.3em]
\multicolumn{3}{l}{\textbf{Selectivity (Sel)}}\\
\hspace{1em}m1: none & No random effects on selectivity & $\sigma_R$, $\sigma_a$\\
\hspace{1em}m2: IID & Selectivity deviations are IID random effects & $\sigma_R$, $\sigma_a$, $\sigma_{Sel}$\\
\hspace{1em}m3: 2D AR1 & Selectivity deviations are random effects with correlation by year and age (2D AR1) & $\sigma_R$, $\sigma_a$, $\sigma_{Sel}$, $\phi_y$, $\phi_a$\\
\addlinespace[0.3em]
\multicolumn{3}{l}{\textbf{Ecov-Recruitment (Ecov)}}\\
\hspace{1em}m1: RW-none & Ecov: random walk (RW), effect on $\beta$: none & $\sigma_R$, $\sigma_a$, $\sigma_x$\\
\hspace{1em}m2: RW-linear & Ecov: random walk (RW), effect on $\beta$: linear & $\sigma_R$, $\sigma_a$, $\sigma_x$, $\beta_1$\\
\hspace{1em}m3: RW-poly & Ecov: random walk (RW), effect on $\beta$: 2nd order polynomial (poly) & $\sigma_R$, $\sigma_a$, $\sigma_x$, $\beta_1$, $\beta_2$\\
\hspace{1em}m4: AR1-linear & Ecov: autocorrelated (AR1), effect on $\beta$: linear & $\sigma_R$, $\sigma_a$, $\sigma_x$, $\phi_x$, $\beta_1$\\
\hspace{1em}m5: AR1-poly & Ecov: autocorrelated (AR1), effect on $\beta$: 2nd order polynomial (poly) & $\sigma_R$, $\sigma_a$, $\sigma_x$, $\phi_x$, $\beta_1$, $\beta_2$\\
\bottomrule
\end{tabular}
\end{table}
\end{landscape}

\pagebreak

\begin{table}

\caption{\label{tab:stock-list}Stocks used in simulation tests.}
\centering
\begin{tabular}[t]{lllllrrlrrr}
\toprule
\multicolumn{1}{c}{ } & \multicolumn{4}{c}{Modules tested} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{Model dim} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{Biol. par.} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{Stock status} \\
\cmidrule(l{3pt}r{3pt}){2-5} \cmidrule(l{3pt}r{3pt}){6-7} \cmidrule(l{3pt}r{3pt}){8-9} \cmidrule(l{3pt}r{3pt}){10-11}
Stock & NAA & M & Sel & Ecov & \# Ages & \# Years & $M$ & $\sigma_R$ & $\frac{B}{B_{40}}$ & $\frac{F}{F_{40}}$\\
\midrule
SNEMA yellowtail flounder & x & x &  & x & 6 & 49 & 0.2-0.4 & 1.67 & 0.01 & 0.44\\
Butterfish & x & x &  &  & 5 & 31 & 1.3 & 0.23 & 2.57 & 0.03\\
North Sea cod & x & x &  &  & 6 & 54 & 0.2-1.2 & 0.87 & 0.14 & 2.00\\
Icelandic herring & x &  &  &  & 11 & 30 & 0.1 & 0.55 & 0.40 & 1.81\\
Georges Bank haddock & x &  & x &  & 9 & 86 & 0.2 & 1.65 & 5.16 & 0.12\\
\bottomrule
\end{tabular}
\end{table}

\pagebreak

\begin{landscape}
\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=8in]{/home/tmiller2/work/wham/wham_sim/plots/into_paper/daic} 

}

\caption{AIC differences by model and stock when fit to original datasets. Stock abbreviations: SNEMA yellowtail flounder (SNEMAYT), North Sea cod (NScod), Icelandic herring (ICEherring), and Georges Bank haddock (GBhaddock).}\label{fig:daic}
\end{figure}
\end{landscape}

\pagebreak

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=6.5in]{/home/tmiller2/work/wham/wham_sim/plots/into_paper/8_REdevs_ICEherring_NAA} 

}

\caption{Abundanc-at-age deviations estimated for Icelandic herring using four models of numbers-at-age (NAA) random effects. m1 = only recruitment deviations are random effects (most similar to traditional statistical catch-at-age, SCAA), and deviations are independent and identically distributed (IID). m2 = as m1, but with autocorrelated recruitment deviations ($\text{AR1}_y$). m3 = all NAA deviations are IID random effects. m4 = as m3, but deviations are correlated by age and year (2D AR1).}\label{fig:devs-ICEherring-naa}
\end{figure}

\pagebreak

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=6in]{/home/tmiller2/work/wham/wham_sim/plots/into_paper/8_REdevs_butterfish_M} 

}

\caption{Natural mortality (\textit{M}) estimated for butterfish using three random effects models. m1 = no random effects on \textit{M}. m2 = \textit{M} deviations are independent and identically distributed (IID). m3 = \textit{M} deviations are correlated by age and year (2D AR1).}\label{fig:devs-butterfish-m}
\end{figure}

\pagebreak

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=6.5in]{/home/tmiller2/work/wham/wham_sim/plots/into_paper/8_REdevs_GBhaddock_sel} 

}

\caption{Selectivity estimated for Georges Bank haddock using three random effects models. m1 = no random effects (constant logistic selectivity). m2 = selectivity deviations are independent and identically distributed (IID). m3 = selectivity deviations are correlated by parameter and year (2D AR1).}\label{fig:devs-GBhaddock-sel}
\end{figure}

\pagebreak

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=6.5in]{/home/tmiller2/work/wham/wham_sim/plots/into_paper/8_CPI_Recruit_SNEMAYT_Ecov2} 

}

\caption{Beverton-Holt stock-recruit relationships fit for Southern New England-Mid Atlantic yellowtail flounder, with and without effects of the Cold Pool Index (CPI). A) CPI estimated from the model with lowest AIC (m4, AR1-linear). Points are observations with 95\% CI, and the line with shading is the model-estimated CPI with 95\% CI. Note the increased uncertainty surrounding the CPI estimate in 2017 (no observation). B) Estimates of spawning stock biomass (SSB), recruitment, and the stock-recruit function from the model without a CPI effect, m1. C) Estimates of SSB and recruitment from m4, with an effect of the CPI on $\beta$. Lines depict the expected stock-recruit relationship in each year $t$, given the CPI in year $t-1$ (color).}\label{fig:devs-SNEMAYT-ecov}
\end{figure}

\pagebreak

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=3.5in]{/home/tmiller2/work/wham/wham_sim/plots/into_paper/aic_cross_multipanel} 

}

\caption{Proportion of simulations in which each model had the lowest AIC. A) Numbers-at-age (NAA), aggregated across all five stocks. B) Natural mortality (\textit{M}), aggregated over two stocks (SNEMAYT and NScod). C) Selectivity (GBhaddock). Not all estimation models converged for each simulation, even when the operating model matched.}\label{fig:aic-cross}
\end{figure}

\pagebreak

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=6.5in]{/home/tmiller2/work/wham/wham_sim/plots/into_paper/estpar_NAA_OEPE} 

}

\caption{Relative error of parameters constraining numbers-at-age (NAA) random effects. Four models were used to simulate 100 datasets keeping fixed effect parameters constant, and then re-fit to each simulated dataset. m1 = only recruitment deviations are random effects (most similar to traditional statistical catch-at-age, SCAA), and deviations are independent and identically distributed (IID). m2 = as m1, but with autocorrelated recruitment deviations ($\text{AR1}_y$). m3 = all NAA deviations are IID random effects. m4 = as m3, but deviations are correlated by age and year (2D AR1). Relative error was calculated as $\frac{\hat{\theta_i}}{\theta} - 1$, where $\hat{\theta_i}$ was the estimate in simulation $i$ for parameter $\theta$, and $\theta$ was the true value (estimate from original dataset). Red points and lines show median relative error with 95\% CI.}\label{fig:estpar-naa}
\end{figure}

\pagebreak

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=6.5in]{/home/tmiller2/work/wham/wham_sim/plots/into_paper/0_ICEherring_NAA_medianCI_OEPE} 

}

\caption{Relative error of key quantities estimated for Icelandic herring using four models of numbers-at-age (NAA) random effects. m1 = only recruitment deviations are random effects (most similar to traditional statistical catch-at-age, SCAA), and deviations are independent and identically distributed (IID). m2 = as m1, but with autocorrelated recruitment deviations ($\text{AR1}_y$). m3 = all NAA deviations are IID random effects. m4 = as m3, but deviations are correlated by age and year (2D AR1).}\label{fig:rel-error-ICEherring-naa}
\end{figure}

\pagebreak

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=6in]{/home/tmiller2/work/wham/wham_sim/plots/into_paper/estpar_M_4par_OEPE} 

}

\caption{Relative error of parameters constraining natural mortality (\textit{M}) random effects. Three models were used to simulate 100 datasets keeping fixed effect parameters constant, and then re-fit to each simulated dataset. m1 = no random effects on \textit{M}. m2 = \textit{M} deviations were independent and identically distributed (IID). m3 = \textit{M} deviations were correlated by age and year (2D AR1). Relative error was calculated as $\frac{\hat{\theta_i}}{\theta} - 1$, where $\hat{\theta_i}$ was the estimate in simulation $i$ for parameter $\theta$, and $\theta$ was the true value (estimate from original dataset). Red points and lines show median relative error with 95\% CI. Stock abbreviations: SNEMA yellowtail flounder (SNEMAYT) and North Sea cod (NScod, m3 did not converge).}\label{fig:estpar-m}
\end{figure}

\pagebreak

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=5in]{/home/tmiller2/work/wham/wham_sim/plots/into_paper/0_butterfish_M_medianCI_OEPE} 

}

\caption{Relative error of key quantities estimated for butterfish using three models of natural mortality (\textit{M}) random effects. m1 = no random effects on \textit{M}. m2 = \textit{M} deviations are independent and identically distributed (IID). m3 = \textit{M} deviations are correlated by age and year (2D AR1).}\label{fig:rel-error-butterfish-m}
\end{figure}

\pagebreak

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=6.5in]{/home/tmiller2/work/wham/wham_sim/plots/into_paper/estpar_sel_OEPE} 

}

\caption{Relative error of parameters constraining selectivity random effects for Georges Bank haddock (GBhaddock). Three models were used to simulate 100 datasets keeping fixed effect parameters constant, and then re-fit to each simulated dataset. m1 = no random effects (constant selectivity). m2 = selectivity deviations were independent and identically distributed (IID). m3 = selectivity deviations were correlated by parameter and year (2D AR1). Relative error was calculated as $\frac{\hat{\theta_i}}{\theta} - 1$, where $\hat{\theta_i}$ was the estimate in simulation $i$ for parameter $\theta$, and $\theta$ was the true value (estimate from original dataset). Red points and lines show median relative error with 95\% CI.}\label{fig:estpar-sel}
\end{figure}

\pagebreak

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=5in]{/home/tmiller2/work/wham/wham_sim/plots/into_paper/0_GBhaddock_sel_medianCI_OEPE} 

}

\caption{Relative error of key quantities estimated for Georges Bank haddock using three models of selectivity random effects. m1 = no random effects (constant logistic selectivity). m2 = selectivity deviations are independent and identically distributed (IID). m3 = selectivity deviations are correlated by parameter and year (2D AR1).}\label{fig:rel-error-GBhaddock-sel}
\end{figure}

\pagebreak

\begin{landscape}
\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=9in]{/home/tmiller2/work/wham/wham_sim/plots/into_paper/estpar_Ecov2_OEPE} 

}

\caption{Relative error of parameters constraining variation in recruitment for Southern New England-Mid Atlantic yellowtail flounder (SNEMAYT). Five models were used to simulate 100 datasets keeping fixed effect parameters constant, and then re-fit to each simulated dataset. All models estimated recruitment using the Beverton-Holt function and included CPI effects on $\beta$: $\hat{R}_{t+1} = \frac{\alpha S_{t}}{1 + e^{\beta_0 + \beta_1 x_{t} + \beta_2 x^2_{t}} S_t}$. m1 = Cold Pool Index (CPI) modeled as a random walk (RW) with no effect on recruitment ($\beta_1 = \beta_2 = 0$). m2 = CPI as RW, linear effect on $\beta$. m3 = CPI as RW, 2nd order polynomial effect on $\beta$. m4 = CPI as AR1, linear effect. m5 = CPI as AR1, polynomial effect. Relative error was calculated as $\frac{\hat{\theta_i}}{\theta} - 1$, where $\hat{\theta_i}$ was the estimate in simulation $i$ for parameter $\theta$, and $\theta$ was the true value (estimate from original dataset). Red points and lines show median relative error with 95\% CI.}\label{fig:estpar-ecov}
\end{figure}
\end{landscape}

\end{document}
